The interactions between land use and cover change (LUCC) and global changes such as
climate change and global biodiversity loss have been recognized and analyzed for
several decades. Thus, many research fields (environment, geography, landscape ecology,
etc.) or the decision support sector of land use planning employ LUCC models. Their use
allows users to better understand the drivers of these changes and to make projections
by generating simulated land use and cover maps (the latter having an important role in
the appropriation of these models by decision makers).

Among the different possible approaches, this thesis focuses on spatially explicit,
statistical pattern-based LUCC models. This type of model takes as input land use maps
and explanatory variables (such as elevation, distance to roads, soil type, etc.), and
returns as output probability maps of transition from one land use to another and can
also perform an allocation, i.e. the simulation (and future projection) of a land use
and land cover map. These outputs are determined from input elements (called calibration
elements) and from a scenario that characterizes a (potentially unprecedented) situation
that the user wishes to evaluate. However, it has been shown in the literature that if
the same case study is analyzed with the help of different models of this type,
different results are obtained, to varying degrees. These differences are significant
and raise questions about the reliability of the models and the validity of all the
results obtained so far in all scientific fields where such tools are used.

In this thesis, LUCC pattern-based modeling approach is formalized in a modular
architecture where one distinguishes the calibration-estimation, allocation and
explanatory variable selection steps. Each of these processes is studied independently
in order to focus only on the corresponding problem. Thus, the calibration-estimation
module is mathematically formalized and a method based on Bayes rule and kernel-based
density estimation is proposed (BayeseKDE). An evaluation process based on a perfectly
controlled problem setting is introduced and offers a basis to evaluate objectively this
module. Some of the methods implemented in existing numerical modeling environments are
analyzed, compared and criticized. The Bayes-eKDE procedure proves to be very efficient
compared to the others in terms of results accuracy and computation time. The allocation
module is also formalized. The notion of allocation bias is introduced and is the basis
of an evaluation process of the module. Two unbiased allocation methods (uSAM and uPAM)
are proposed and their superiority over other methods found in a representative subset
of modeling software is illustrated in a series of case studies of increasing
complexity. Finally, a method for selecting explanatory variables that maximizes their
relevance while minimizing their redundancy is introduced proposed (Cramer-MRMR). Its
parameterization is illustrated through a case study. All these methods are implemented
in an open-source Python package named CLUMPY for Comprehensive Land Use [and cover]
Model in PYthon. This software is a deliverable of this thesis and acts as a
demonstrator of the methods proposed in this work, while being already usable by an
informed user on his own case study. A graphical user interface (GUI) allows to
configure a simple case study.

Many current issues in territorial planning tend to rely more and more on LUCC modeling
(food autonomy, land artificialisation, local economy, etc.). The advances in this field
introduced in this thesis are therefore essential to guarantee the validity of the
corresponding answers.
